# Reproducible analysis of Omics data in the R environment

Author: Rödiger Stefan (BTU Cottbus - Senftenberg)

Co-author: sMichal Burdukiewicz, Konstantin Blagodatskikh, Andrej-Nikolai Spiess

# Descripition

The ensemble of biomolecules in a cell, tissue or organism defines their state and function. This includes biomolecules such as nucleic acids and proteins with different structures, sizes and biochemical properties. For a comprehensive understanding of biological systems, it is generally accepted that several dimensions of biomarkers must be considered simultaneously. This is referred to as "multi-omics" or "vertical-omics". Essential analytical technologies include quantitative PCR (qPCR), digital PCR (dPCR), DNA microarrays, Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) and microbead arrays, which provide insights into complex biomedical contexts. Several software packages have been developed for the analysis of such data sets. In most cases, the software is distributed either as closed source software or as a monolithic block with little freedom to perform analytical procedures. Another problem is the reproducible generation and analysis of data that has not been sufficiently resolved. This applies, for example, to NGS and qPCR data analysis. Adapted and process-optimized strategies are necessary for each step, starting with experimental design, quality control, reading process, quantification of transcripts up to visualization and data analysis. We argue, among other things, that R is an excellent basis for reproducible and transparent data analysis in a highly customizable cross-platform environment. For beginners, however, it is often difficult to master R or learn the skills of the variety of packages available. The presentation describes exemplary workflows for the analysis of qPCR or dPCR experiments including automation approaches for machine learning using the chipPCR, dpcR and PCRedux packages. Our analysis is completely based on R-packages available from public repositories. In addition, we provide information related to standardized and reproducible research.
