# Modelling and Analysing Interval Data in R

Author: Paula Brito (Faculty of Economics, University of Porto)

Co-author: A. Pedro Duarte Silva (Católica Porto Business School & CEGE, Univ. Católica Portuguesa, Portugal)

# Description

Symbolic Data Analysis is concerned with analysing data with intrinsic variability, which is to be taken into account. In Data Mining, Multivariate Data Analysis and classical Statistics, the elements under analysis are generally individual entities for which a single value is recorded for each variable - e.g., individuals, described by age, salary, education level, etc. However, when the elements of interest are classes or groups of some kind - the citizens living in given towns; car models, rather than specific vehicles - then there is variability inherent to the data. Symbolic data goes beyond the usual data representation model, considering variables whose observed values for each element are no longer necessarily single real values or categories, but may assume the form of sets, intervals, or, more generally, distributions. 

In this talk we focus on the analysis of interval data, i.e., when the variables’ values are intervals of IR. Parametric probabilistic models for interval-valued variables have been proposed and studied by Brito & Duarte Silva (2012). These models are based on the representation of each observed interval by its MidPoint and Log-Range, and Multivariate Normal and Skew-Normal distributions are assumed for the whole set of 2p MidPoints and Log-Ranges of the original p interval-valued variables. The intrinsic nature of the interval-valued variables leads to different structures of the variance-covariance matrix, represented by different possible configurations.

The R package MAINT.Data implements the proposed models and methodologies. This package is built around S4 classes and methods, introducing a specific data class for representing interval data. It includes functions and methods for modelling and analysing interval data, in particular maximum likelihood estimation and statistical tests for the different configurations. Methods for (M)ANOVA and Discriminant Analysis of this data class are also provided. For the Gaussian model, Model-Based Clustering, robust estimation, and outlier detection are implemented; corresponding methods for Robust Discriminant Analysis are also available. MAINT.Data is available at CRAN as part of the R software project.

# Bio

Paula Brito is Associate Professor at the Faculty of Economics of the University of Porto, and member of the Artificial Intelligence and Decision Support Research Group (LIAAD) of INESC TEC, Portugal. She holds a doctorate degree in Applied Mathematics from the University Paris Dauphine, and an Habilitation in Applied Mathematics from the University of Porto. Her current research focuses on the analysis of multidimensional complex data, known as symbolic data, for which she develops statistical approaches and multivariate analysis methodologies. In this context, she has been involved in two European research projects and coordinates the Portuguese participation in the H2020 FinTech project. Paula Brito was president of the International Association for Statistical Computing (IASC) in 2013-2015. She has been invited speaker at several international conferences, is regularly member of international program committees, has been chair of COMPSTAT 2008 and will be chair of the upcoming conference IFCS 2021. Web-page: www.fep.up.pt/docentes/mpbrito .
