# Generalized additive models for short-term electricity demand forecasting

Author: Matteo Fasiolo (University of Bristol)

# Description

Reliable electricity load forecasts are an essential input for electricity production planning and power grid management. The UK has historically relied heavily on fossil fuel power plants, whose high ramp up rates made adjusting for forecasting errors easy. As such stations are being replaced with less flexible nuclear plants and renewables, the power system is becoming much more reliant on accurate forecasts.
We will provide an overview on the use of Generalized Additive Models (GAMs) for short-term electricity demand forecasting. GAMs are flexible statistical regression models, which have proved highly useful at Électricité de France (EDF), where they are used operationally to forecast aggregate electricity demand. The main reasons behind their success are:

1. interpretability: it is possible to visually assess how the forecast depends on factors such as temperature or cloud coverage. This is key to convincing non-statisticians in the industry to adopt such methods.
2. Scalability: with the methods of [1] and [2] it is possible to fit GAM models with millions of observations within seconds on a standard laptop.  Big Data methods will be essential for handling the substantial data volumes generated by smart meters.
3. Flexibility: standard GAM models can include a wide variety of non-linear or random effects and response distribution. Further, the new methods proposed in [3] and [4] are not limited to modelling mean demand, but can be used to predict higher moments (e.g. variance) or quantiles of the load distribution. Quantile GAMs are particularly useful for risk management purposes, when the focus is obtaining tail estimates of the load distribution.
4. High quality open-source software: the mgcv R package is a widely used R package for fitting GAM models, and it is included by default in all R distributions. It implements the methods mentioned above, and it is has been extended by the mgcViz and qgam R packages (among others), which provide scalable visualizations [5] and tools for handling quantile GAMs.
Besides illustrating how recently developed GAM methods can be used in the context of short-terms load forecasting, we will (if time allows) also mention some directions for future research in this area, such as forecasting demand extrema (e.g. daily or weekly max) or handling different levels of aggregation within a hierarchical GAM framework and dealing with data at different temporal resolutions.

References:

[1] Wood, S.N., Goude, Y. and Shaw, S., 2015. Generalized additive models for large data sets. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C (Applied Statistics), 64(1), pp.139-155.

[2] Wood, S.N., Li, Z., Shaddick, G. and Augustin, N.H., 2017. Generalized additive models for Gigadata: modelling the UK black smoke network daily data. Journal of the American Statistical Association,112(519), pp.1199-1210.

[3] Wood, S.N., Pya, N. and Säfken, B., 2016. Smoothing parameter and model selection for general smooth models. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 111(516), pp.1548-1563.

[4] Fasiolo, M., Goude, Y., Nedellec, R., Zaffran, M. and Wood, S.N., 2017. Fastcalibrated additive quantile regression. arXiv preprintarXiv:1707.03307.

[5] Fasiolo, M., Nedellec, R., Goude, Y. and Wood, S.N., 2018. Scalable visualisation methods for modern Generalized Additive Models. arXivpreprint arXiv:1809.10632.
